docs: make a start on query debugging topic (#1914)
Semmle/ql: docs/language/learn-ql/writing-queries/debugging-queries.rst

> Query writing: common issues

Reviewer: Should this specifically mention performance issues?

Author: At present it only mentions performance issues, so yes. But I'm not sure what other detail may end up in this topic. 
Can you think if anything else that should be mentioned?

========================================

This topic offers some simple tips on how to avoid common problems that can affect the performance of your queries.
Before reading the tips below, it is worth reiterating a few important points about CodeQL and the QL language:

- CodeQL `predicates <https://help.semmle.com/QL/ql-handbook/predicates.html>`__ and `classes <https://help.semmle.com/QL/ql-handbook/types.html#classes>`__ are evaluated to database `tables <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Table_(database)>`__. Large predicates generate large tables with many rows, and are therefore expensive to compute.

> - The QL language is implemented using standard database operations and `relational algebra <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relational_algebra>`__ (such as join, projection, union, etc.). For further information about query languages and databases, see :doc:`About QL <../about-ql>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The QL language is implemented using standard database operations and `relational algebra <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relational_algebra>`__ (such as join, projection, and union). For further information about query languages and databases, see :doc:`About QL <../about-ql>`.
```

We don't really need "etc" after "such as".

Author: True!

> - Queries are evaluated *bottom-up*, which means that a predicate is not evaluated until **all** of the predicates that it depends on are evaluated. For more information on query evaluation, see `Evaluation of QL programs <https://help.semmle.com/QL/ql-handbook/evaluation.html>`__ in the QL handbook. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Queries are evaluated *bottom-up*, which means that a predicate is not evaluated until *all* of the predicates that it depends on are evaluated. For more information on query evaluation, see `Evaluation of QL programs <https://help.semmle.com/QL/ql-handbook/evaluation.html>`__ in the QL handbook. 
```

Note sure whether we we want to consistently use italics or bold for emphasis. It doesn't really matter.

Author: Let's go with italics, as you've suggested.

Performance tips
================

Follow the guidelines below to ensure that you don't get get tripped up by the most common QL performance pitfalls.

> Avoid cartesian products

Reviewer: Not sure if "Avoid" is the right way to describe this.

This problem usually occurs accidentally, because the QL author forgot to add a necessary condition. It's usually also a correctness issue - the predicate will have more results than intended. I therefore think "avoid" is not the right way to describe it - perhaps "Eliminate cartesian products".

> Follow the guidelines below to ensure that you don't get get tripped up by the most common CodeQL performance pitfalls.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow the guidelines below to ensure that you don't get tripped up by the most common CodeQL performance pitfalls.
```

Author: 🤦‍♂

------------------------

The performance of a predicate can often be judged by considering roughly how many results it has. 

> In other words, one way of creating badly performing predicates is by using two variables without relating them in any way, or only relating them using a negation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One way of creating badly performing predicates is by using two variables without relating them in any way, or only relating them using a negation.
```

This leads to computing the `Cartesian product <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cartesian_product>`__ between the sets of possible values for each variable, potentially generating a huge table of results.

> This can occur whenever you inadvertently fail to specify restrictions on your variables. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can occur if you don't specify restrictions on your variables. 
```

(Sounds slightly simpler)

For instance, in the following case none of the parameters are related in the example predicate ``methodAndAClass``, and therefore the results are unrestricted::

   // BAD! Cross-product
   predicate methodAndAClass(Method m, Class c) {
   	  any()
   }

> Similarly, you should avoid the following construct::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows a similar mistake in a QL member predicate:
```

The predicate holds if ``m`` contains an access to ``f``, but also conservatively assumes that methods without bodies (for example, native methods) may access *any* field.

> However, if ``m`` is a native method, the table computed by ``mayAccess`` will contain a row ``m, f`` for *all* fields ``f`` in the codebase, which could potentially be very large.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, if ``m`` is a native method, the table computed by ``mayAccess`` will contain a row ``m, f`` for *all* fields ``f`` in the codebase, making it potentially very large.
```

This example shows a similar mistake in a member predicate::

     class Foo extends Class {
       ...
       // BAD! Does not use ‘this’ 
       Method getToString() {
         result.getName() = "ToString"
       }
       ...
     }

> Note that while ``getToString()`` does not declare any parameters, it has two implicit parameters, ``result`` and ``this``, which it fails to relate. Therefore, the table computed by ``getToString()`` contains a row for every combination of ``result`` and ``this``. That is, a row for every combination of a method named ``"ToString"`` that is an instance of ``Foo``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that while ``getToString()`` does not declare any parameters, it has two implicit parameters, ``result`` and ``this``, which it fails to relate. Therefore, the table computed by ``getToString()`` contains a row for every combination of ``result`` and ``this``. That is, a row for every combination of a method named ``"ToString"`` and an instance of ``Foo``.
```

To avoid making this mistake, ``this`` should be restricted in the member predicate ``getToString()`` on the class ``Foo``.

Use specific types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`Types <https://help.semmle.com/QL/ql-handbook/types.html>`__ provide an upper bound on the size of a relation. 
This helps the query optimizer be more effective, so it's generally good to use the most specific types possible. For example::

  predicate foo(LoggingCall e)

is preferred over::

  predicate foo(Expr e)

> From the type context, the query optimizer deduces that some parts of the program are redundant and removes them, or **specializes** them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From the type context, the query optimizer deduces that some parts of the program are redundant and removes them, or *specializes* them.
```

Avoid complex recursion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`Recursion <https://help.semmle.com/QL/ql-handbook/recursion.html>`__ is about self-referencing definitions.
It can be extremely powerful as long as it is used appropriately.
On the whole, you should try to make recursive predicates as simple as possible.

> That is, you should define a **base case** that allows the predicate to *bottom out*, along with a single **recursive call**::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That is, you should define a *base case* that allows the predicate to *bottom out*, along with a single *recursive call*::
```

  int depth(Stmt s) {
    exists(Callable c | c.getBody() = s | result = 0) // base case
    or

>     result = depth(s.getParent()) + 1 // recursive case

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    result = depth(s.getParent()) + 1 // recursive call
```

Sorry, hadn't spotted this earlier - should it be recursive _call_? (Other changes LGTM)

Author: 🤷‍♂

Author: From what you've written in the handbook, 'call' seem correct. Thanks!

Performance tips
----------------

Follow the guidelines below to ensure that you don't get get tripped up by the most common CodeQL performance pitfalls.

Eliminate cartesian products
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The performance of a predicate can often be judged by considering roughly how many results it has. 
One way of creating badly performing predicates is by using two variables without relating them in any way, or only relating them using a negation.
This leads to computing the `Cartesian product <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cartesian_product>`__ between the sets of possible values for each variable, potentially generating a huge table of results.

This can occur whenever you inadvertently fail to specify restrictions on your variables. 

For instance, in the following case none of the parameters are related in the example predicate ``methodAndAClass``, and therefore the results are unrestricted::

   // BAD! Cross-product
   predicate methodAndAClass(Method m, Class c) {
   	  any()

>    }

Reviewer 3: This example is a bit too contrived. How about this?

---

For instance, consider the following predicate that checks whether a Java method `m` may access a field `f`:

```
predicate mayAccess(Method m, Field f) {
  f.getAnAccess().getEnclosingCallable() = m
  or
  not exists(m.getBody())
}
```

The predicate holds if `m` contains an access to `f`, but also conservatively assumes that methods without bodies (for example native methods) may access any field at all.

What this means, however, is that if `m` is a native method, then the table computed by `mayAccess` contains a row `m, f` for _all_ fields `f` in the code base, resulting in a potentially very large table.

This example shows a similar mistake in a member predicate::

     class Foo extends Class {
       ...
       // BAD! Does not use ‘this’ 
       Method getToString() {

>          result.getName().matches("ToString")

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
         result.getName() = "ToString"
```

       }
       ...
     }

> Here, the class ``Method getToString()`` is equivalent to ``predicate getToString(Class this, Method result)``, in which the parameters are unrestricted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that while `getToString()` does not declare any parameters, it has two implicit parameters `result` and `this`, which it fails to relate. Hence the table computed by `getToString()` contains a row for every combination of values of `result` and `this`, that is, for every combination of a method named `"ToString"` and an instance of `Foo`.
```

To avoid making this mistake, ``this`` should be restricted in the member predicate ``getToString()`` on the class ``Foo``.

> Finally, consider a predicate of the following form::

Reviewer 3: The first example above now has this form, so perhaps this paragraph can be shortened.
